---
date: 2023-04-08
title: "The Birth of Alsa-Masa"
image: "images/blog/history.jpg"
categories: ["History"]
author: Roque Remo
---


Alsa Masa has its roots with Wilfredo "Baby" Aquino, a barangay captain in Barangay Agdao in Davao City in the early 1980s. 

At that time, Davao City was under the scourge of the Communist New People's Army (NPA) which was spreading terror through assassinations and violence. This was in addition to the high crime rate and prevalence of illegal drugs in the city which the government seemed helpless to solve. 

Aquino led a local community vigilante group to rise up or 'mag-alsa' against the abuses of the NPA in his town. He began with 7 people, giving the leadership to his friend Romeo Y. Remo Sr. 

The group gained the support of Lt. Col. Franco M. Calida, a strong and fierce chief of the Davao Metro District Command, who provided the group with arms and food. 

It had its first major action on April 8, 1986 when it killed a commander of the NPA. That date is seen as the foundation day of the grouop which was also known as "Masang Dabaw".

Remo increased the membership and expanded the activities of the group to include the prevention of crime, drugs, prostitution, and many other social ills.     


## Not CAFGU

Contrary to popular belief, Alsa Masa was never part of the militia called the Civilian Armed Forces Geographical Units or CAFGU. It stayed as a community-based grassroots organization that focused on the following activities: 

- anti-crime
- anti-corruption
- anti-terror
- anti-drugs

This was very different from the CAFGU which focused on anti-insurgency operations. 
